Remember: Go slow, 15 min attention span

Have people write down any pre-existing questions that they have about git,
and we'll answer them after the break.

Explain the goals of the workshop (./goals.txt)

Motivate Git (dont spend much time)
    Linux has 12000 contributors
    Exciting/allowed for serious progress
    Open datasets/public research/collaboration!

Discuss approach (./approach.txt)
    Git is a power tool
        The hammer doesn't ask
    Git is a black box.
    Git has its own lexicon.

Git setup (./setup.txt)
    Give git information about the commit author (Navigate to slide):
    Create our first git project (Open Terminal.app or git-bash):
    Explain overall interaction with git

Concepts (./concepts)
    Explain the word repository (advance slide)
    Explain the graph!

Hands on!

    Structure of git commands!
    Make some commits!
    Branching and HEAD
        Git has the notion of being /ON/ a branch or /OFF/ a branch, when its
        on a branch feature, and you make a commit, git relabels feature to
        point to your new commit.

        When you're not on any branch, git won't do this for you. Git will
        loudly complain when you're off a branch because its easy to lose any
        work you perform.

        Recall that if you don't attach a label Git won't be able to reach
        those commits. 

        Branches really are /just/ labels. 
            git has no idea where the branch begins, which is unintuitive.

    Push commits up to github

        Explain what a remote is

        Add github remote

        Allude to differences between local branches and remote branches

    Fork story.git repo in github
    Clone their fork of story.git repo in github
    Add my remote, add their own remote

        After everyone has cloned, push some changes. 
        Experiment with fetching and show that fetching doesn't affect our
        repo, explain (remote vs local branches)
        Read the status of git status
        Merge
        Then introduce the notorious/infamous command `git pull`

Stickies before exiting.
10am break until 10:20am


What did you like, what did you dislike?
